Update jsem proposal to address problems discovered in GHC #25087 (under review) (#673)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0540-jsem.rst

- A *jobclient* is a subprocess spawned by the jobserver or another jobclient.

  Each jobclient can interact with the semaphore by using a valid semaphore
  identifier provided to it by a jobserver.

  Each jobclient starts with one available token (its *implicit token*,
  which was acquired by the parent which spawned it), and can request more
  tokens through the Jobserver Protocol by waiting on the semaphore.

  Each time a jobclient wants to spawn a new jobclient subprocess, it **must**
  pass on a single token to the child jobclient. This token can either be the
  jobclient's implicit token, or another token which the jobclient acquired
  from the semaphore. It **should** also pass on the identifier of the semaphore, so
  that the child jobclient may acquire additional tokens from the semaphore.

  Each jobclient **must** release exactly as many tokens as it has acquired from
  the semaphore (this does not include the implicit token).

The **semaphore identifier** must begin a a prefix ``v<N>-`` where the ``<N>``
specifies the ``semaphore-compat`` major version that this semaphore was created
using. For instance, a semaphore created with ``semaphore-compat-2.0.0`` could

> be called ``v2-some-semaphore12345``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be called ``v2.0-some-semaphore12345``.
```

`2.0` is the major version according to the [PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/). Of course you could choose to always bump the first component here, but I think it would not hurt to clarify.

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine, maybe even good, to distinguish between the *binary* compatibility of the semaphore implementation and the *source* compatibility of `semaphore-compat`. PVP is about source compatibility, but the authors of `semaphore-compat` might need to make a breaking API change while still preserving binary compatibility with previous versions of the library.

Using the first component of the package version to indicate binary compatibility level seems reasonable to me.

*Jobclients* that are instantiated with an incompatible semaphore (as detected
by looking at the version of the identifier) must continue the build without
requesting any additional tokens, using only the implicit token they inherited

> from their parent process.

Reviewer: Simple and to the point. Perfect!

  Each time a jobclient wants to spawn a new jobclient subprocess, it **must**
  pass on a single token to the child jobclient. This token can either be the
  jobclient's implicit token, or another token which the jobclient acquired
  from the semaphore. It **should** also pass on the identifier of the semaphore, so
  that the child jobclient may acquire additional tokens from the semaphore.

  Each jobclient **must** release exactly as many tokens as it has acquired from
  the semaphore (this does not include the implicit token).

The **semaphore identifier** must begin with a prefix ``v<N>-`` where ``<N>``
is a positive integer specifying the **protocol version** of the semaphore.
For instance, a semaphore created with ``semaphore-compat-2.x`` uses protocol
version 2 and could be called ``v2-some-semaphore12345``.

Note that the protocol version is distinct from the PVP package version of
``semaphore-compat``.  All releases within a major version series of
``semaphore-compat`` (e.g. 2.0.0 through 2.9.9) **must** use the same
protocol version and be wire-compatible with each other.  A protocol version
bump (and corresponding major version bump of the library) requires approval

> from the GHC Proposals Committee.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from the GHC Steering Committee.
```

> Implementation of the protocol

Reviewer 4: This is more than a mere implementation matter.   The `semaphore-compat` library is part of the specification.   Maybe re-title this subsection?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The implementation is built on ``semaphore-compat``, a Haskell library that
provides an abstract semaphore interface. Tools that wish to use this feature

> must do so by means of this library.

Reviewer 4: So the API of the library is part of this proposal. Please can you lay out the API of the library, here?

Reviewer 4: > So the API of the library is part of this proposal. Please can you lay out the API of the library, here?

You did not respond.... yet authors *must* use this API so it seems important to the proposal.  Am I off target?  This is far from what I know!

Reviewer 2: @wz1000 can you add the core operations here (i.e. `create`, `acquire`, `release`) and link to https://hackage.haskell.org/package/semaphore-compat-1.0.0/docs/System-Semaphore.html for the details.

Ultimately the library may evolve and the API Docs should be authoritative, but it's good to capture the starting point here for posterity.

The implementation consists of two separate parts: jobservers and jobclients.
We want GHC to act as a jobclient and ``cabal``/``stack`` to be jobservers.

The interface supports the following operations:

1. The jobserver must be able to create and destroy semaphores and initialise them with a
  given number of tokens

> 2. Clients must be able to connect to the semaphore with identifier (string) provided by the server

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Clients must be able to connect to the semaphore with an identifier (a string) provided by the server
```

these semaphores. On Windows, this was a semaphore implementation provided by
the system Win32 library, and on POSIX platforms this was the POSIX semaphore
implementation provided by the system C library (libc, typically either the GNU
C library or musl libc).

This is sufficient if both the jobserver and the jobclient are linked
against the same system C library, as is usually the case when the system
C library is dynamically linked against the unique implementation provided
by the platform. 

However, on Linux systems, it has become common practice to ship system
independent statically linked executables using the musl libc implmentation.
This becomes problematic when using jobservers and jobclients that are linking
against different C semaphore implementations, for example GHC dynamically
linked against the system glibc and ``cabal-install`` statically linked against
a musl libc. Each libc implementation has its own independent semaphore implementation
based on shared memory datastructures, and these are not compatible with each
other. This has manifested in bug reports against ``cabal-install``
([20]_) and GHC ([21]_).

> To support this method of distribution it becomes necessary to avoid using
> shared memory datastructures provided by the system C library to implement
> semaphores, and instead rely on some mechanism which is robust against mixing
> of jobservers and jobclients compiled against different system C library
> implementations. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To support this method of distribution, we must avoid using shared memory datastructures
provided by the system C library to implement semaphores, and instead rely on some
mechanism which is robust against mixing of jobservers and jobclients compiled against
different system C library implementations. 
```

POSIX platforms will switch to using a semaphore implementation based on
communication via Unix domain sockets. This avoids the troubles with the shared
memory datastructures used to implement system semaphore implementations.

We can continue to use the system semaphore implementation on Windows as there
are no concerns about differing underlying system semaphore implementations
on this platform, and Windows also provides no direct substitute for Unix
sockets as proposed to be used by ``semaphore-compat`` on POSIX systems.

Backwards compatibility concerns with the updated semaphore implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, GHC 9.8.{1,2} and GHC 9.10.1 provide jobclient implementations based
on ``semaphore-compat-1.0.0``, which ``cabal-install-3.12.1.0`` also uses to provide
a jobserver implementation. ``semaphore-compat-1.0.0`` uses the problematic POSIX
system semaphores and is susceptible to the restrictions regarding system C library
usage by jobservers and jobclients.

Since the underlying semaphore implementation is being fundamentally changed, the

> future version of ``semaphore-compat``, presumably shipped with a future version
> of GHC and ``cabal-install`` would be incompatible with existing jobservers and

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
future version of ``semaphore-compat`` – presumably shipped with a future version
of GHC and ``cabal-install`` – would be incompatible with existing jobservers and
```

jobclients linking against ``semaphore-compat-1.0.0``.

For instance, this means

- ``cabal-install-3.12.1.0`` would be unable to compile code with the
  ``--semaphore`` flag enabled for future versions of GHC shipping with the
  updated ``semaphore-compat`` release. There could be a mechanism
  in the new version of ``semaphore-compat`` (linked to by the future version of
  GHC) to detect such a scenario and output an informative error message.

> - Similarly future versions of ``cabal-install`` would be unable to use

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Similarly, future versions of ``cabal-install`` would be unable to use
```

once a job is done, we can instead re-use this token if we have other pending
jobs. This prioritises the compilation of a single unit.

> Abstract Semaphore Interface

Reviewer 4: This subsection is at least partly about (a) history and (b) implementation details.   None of it is part of the proposed specification.

Maybe move 
* back-compt stuff to a section on back-compat (see [template](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0000-template.rst)) .  Including the current 2.6 
* implementation stuff  (incl the current 2.5) to a Section on Implementation.  (Proposals often have such a section.)

  the semaphore mechanism with existing versions of GHC such as 9.8.{1,2} and
  9.10.1. However, this could be detected by ``cabal-install`` and the feature
  automatically disabled, much like it currently is if attempted to be enabled
  for versions of GHC that don't support ``-jsem`` such as 9.6.

Backwards and forwards compatibility for the abstract semaphores provided by ``semaphore-compat``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the previous section illustrates, breaking changes to the communication
protocol used to implement these semaphores are painful and lead to the breakage
of existing compilers and build tools.

As such, we must strive to avoid such breaking changes as much as possible.
In the (hopefully rare) case when such a change cannot be avoided, the change
must meet a high bar of justification.

Concretely, the communication protocol used in each major version series
of ``semaphore-compat`` must be compatible with other versions of the
library belonging to the same major version series. For instance, a
``semaphore-compat-2.0.0`` must be compatible with ``semaphore-compat-2.9.9``, but

> may not be compatible with ``semaphore-compat-3.0.0``.

Reviewer: This is not strictly relevant to the proposal, but do note that the [PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/) implies that `semaphore-compat-2.1` is already a major bump from `2.0`. It would suffice to release the new version of `semaphore-compat` as 1.1.

Reviewer 2: See my comment above about API vs (effectively) ABI changes. I think this lens makes sense to apply here, though I would rephrase to use PVP versions with the typical four components.

protocol used to implement these semaphores are painful and lead to the breakage
of existing compilers and build tools.

As such, we must strive to avoid such breaking changes as much as possible.
In the (hopefully rare) case when such a change cannot be avoided, the change
must meet a high bar of justification.

Concretely, the communication protocol used in each major version series
of ``semaphore-compat`` must be compatible with other versions of the
library belonging to the same major version series. For instance, a
``semaphore-compat-2.0.0`` must be compatible with ``semaphore-compat-2.9.9``, but
may not be compatible with ``semaphore-compat-3.0.0``.

Breaking changes to the protocol require a major version bump and need to be
justified to and accepted by the GHC Proposals Committee.

To allow breaking changes to the protocol to be detected we require that,
starting with ``semaphore-compat-2.0.0``, the **semaphore identifier** must
begin a a prefix ``v<N>-`` where the ``<N>`` specifies the ``semaphore-compat``
major version that this semaphore was created using. For instance,
a semaphore created with ``semaphore-compat-2.0.0`` could be called

> ``v2-some-semaphore12345``.

Reviewer: Redundant with the specification? Generally I could live with a lot less text in this section, because the compat story is clear from the specification now.
